---
title: Crash Course Study Skills
date: "2017-11-11"
template: "post"
draft: true
slug: "/posts/crash-course-study-skills-notes/"
category: "What I Read"
tags:
  - "PBS"
  - "Learning"
description: "Notes from a YouTube program I watched one winter. (Tagline: \"Over the next 10 weeks, Thomas Frank is going to help you learn to be a better student. We'll go over study tips, note taking, getting organized, and so much more!\")"
---

Hand-written notes are superior to typed at least partially because the former forces you to focus more on the semantics (vs syntax) of the message you’re hearing (due to the need to rephrase in order to compensate for the slower pace of notetaking.)

Examples are the most important among e.g. lists, definitions, conclusions, summaries, etc. - especially for facilitating the later application of complex/abstract formulas/ideas.

The **Cornell method of notetaking**: three sections.

1.  _Notes:_ take down, in outline format, the presentation
2.  _Cues:_ unanswered questions, or prompts to guide studying during later review
3.  _Summary:_ after the lecture ends, think for 2-3 minutes re: the presentation’s biggest ideas; then, coalesce into 1-2 sentences

By the college level, we can read at about 200-400 wpm. Speed reading techniques are largely non-scientific (we’re limited by physical constraints of e.g. eye-movement speeds.)

Set a countdown timer as you sit down to read a chapter: it’s not important to actually hit this goal; rather, it’s to help you focus on reading through to the end w/o distraction.

Highlighting can be dangerous, as it often confuses the user as to their actual recall abilities (vs their recognition skill.)

Morse code method: while skimming/reading for the first time, put a dot by each sentence with an important idea; put a dash by supporting examples/explanations/evidence. (This is useful for when you reread: and doesn’t cost much in terms of reading speed.)

**SQ3R** for Active Reading:
1.  _Surveying:_ skim the overview/headings/conclusion (to prime the brain);
2.  _Questioning:_ write out some Q’s that come to mind before reading (partially to prime, again; more so, though, to focus the lines of exploration)
3.  _Reading:_ read in order to answer the questions generated by #2
4.  _Reciting:_ later, retrieve from memory what you read as if you were explaining it to a friend - important to use your own words to rephrase the material
5.  _Review:_ still later, repeat #4, but in a deeper, more dialogic method (such that you have to return to the passage for citations/details.)

Sensory memory is lost almost immediately as it enters the brain; if not lost, it goes to the working memory.

Working memory exists in the prefrontal cortex. It can hold at most 4-7 items, or slightly more if chunked; it lasts for ~15-30 seconds, at which point it’s lost or transferred to the hippocampus.

The hippocampus adds neurotransmitter chemicals (as metadata about the information), which then allows the information to be encoded as long-term memory via the formation of new synapses.

Which neurotransmitters are added by the hippocampus determines how deeply-embedded the item is within long-term memory.

Benedict Carey posits the **“Forget-to-Learn” theory:**
1.  Memories have two types of ‘strength’
    1.  Storage strength: once a memory is encoded, it can really only get stronger
    2.  Retrieval strength: this does fade with time
2.  The greater the difficulty in recalling a memory (i.e. the weaker the current retrieval strength), the greater the learning impact will be from recalling it.
3.  This leads to Robert Bjork’s “desirable difficulty principle”

The **Leitner System** is a simplified spaced-repetition framework:

1.  Create 5 boxes.
2.  Box #1 is studied daily; #2 every 3 days; #3, weekly; #4, biweekly; #5, monthly.
3.  All flashcards start in Box #1.
4.  When a card is successfully answered, it goes to the next-highest box.
5.  When a card is unsuccessfully answered, it goes to Box #1 (regardless of its current position.)

Attention has two forms:

1.  Top-down: voluntary, task-driven
2.  Bottom-up: involuntary, stimulus-driven

When doing deep work, set your phone elsewhere.

Create a space you’ll return to, repeatedly; use this space for deep work.

The 25-30 min zone specified by Pomodoro is research-backed (it can grow with practice, but that’s a reasonable starting-scale.)

Be mindful of high-density vs low-density fun (latter is e.g. reading Hacker News, social media, etc; former is time spent with others, or on active, intentional hobbies.)

When problem-solving: write down your failed solution attempts, as reviewing them will help you envision new paths via variations on those prior.

Next time you need to ask a senior dev for help, note down and later analyze where you got blocked, then think through how you could have gotten around that blocker yourself (to prepare for the next similar incident.)

When researching:

1.  Prewrite first, to arm yourself with questions and potential lines of argument which will then help you focus your exploration;
2.  Prevent ‘research recursion syndrom’ by asking, after every few hours, whether you
    1.  Have at least 2 sources for each main argument; and
    2.  At least one source for each non-crucial point (and, if both are true, then stopping the research process in order to begin writing.)